# StatPhysBio synthetic data example

## Overview

The goal of this example is to retrieve a simulated 3D MERFISH experiment generated by the statphysbio laboratroy at ASU and run merfish3d-analysis through quantifying transcripts. This is a synthetic 119-gene MERFISH experiment in a small field of view (FOV).

## Preliminaries

You need to make sure you have a working python enviornment with `merfish3d-analysis` properly installed, `Baysor` properly installed, and our human olfactory bulb 3D MERFISH dataset downloaded. The dataset is ~100 MB and you will need roughly another 100 MB of temporary space to create the `qi2labDataStore` structure we use to perform tile registration, global registration, segmentation, pixel decoding, filtering, and cell assignment.

- [merfish3d-analysis](https://www.github.com/qi2lab/merfish3d-analysis)
- [Baysor](https://github.com/kharchenkolab/Baysor)
- [Synthetic 3D MERFISH data](https://www.bil.com)

## Downloading the data

All of the required code to process this data is in the Zenodo download. There should be three top-level directories in the downloaded folder, `raw_data`, `processing_code`, and `results`. The directory structure is as follows:

/ 
├── raw_data/ 
│ ├── data_r0001_tile000_xyz/
│ ├── data_r0001_tile000_xyz.csv
| ...
| ...
│ ├── data_r0009_tile041_xyz/
│ ├── data_r0009_tile041_xyz.csv
│ ├── codebook.csv
│ ├── bit_order.csv
│ ├── hot_pixel_flir.tiff
│ ├── scan_metadata.csv
├── processing_code/ 
│ ├── 00_readme.txt 
│ └── 01_convert_to_datastore.py
│ └── 02_register_and_deconvolve.py
│ └── 03_cellpose_segmentation.py
│ └── 04_pixeldecode_and_baysor.py
│ └── qi2lab_humanOB.toml
└── results/
│ └── transcripts.parquet
│ └── cell_outlines.gzip
│ |── mtx/
| │ └── .gzip
| │ └── .gzip
| │ └── .gzip

## Processing non-qi2lab data

Because this is a simulated experiment, it does not follow the standard metadata or file structure of a microscope. 

## Processing steps

For each of the python files in the `processing_code` directory, you will need to scroll to the bottom and replace the path with the correct path. For example, in `01_convert_to_datastore.py` you'll want to change this section:

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    root_path = Path(r"/path/to/download/raw_data")
    baysor_binary_path = Path(
        r"/path/to/Baysor/bin/baysor/bin/./baysor"
    )
    baysor_options_path = Path(
        r"/path/to/download/processing_code/qi2lab_humanOB.toml"
    )
    julia_threads = 20 # replace with number of threads to use.

    hot_pixel_image_path = Path(r"/path/to/download/raw_data/flir_hot_pixel_image.tif")

    convert_data(
        root_path=root_path,
        baysor_binary_path=baysor_binary_path,
        baysor_options_path=baysor_options_path,
        julia_threads=julia_threads,
        hot_pixel_image_path=hot_pixel_image_path
    )
```

For all of the files in `processing_code`, you'll set the `root_path` to `root_path = Path(r"/path/to/download/raw_data")`. The package automatically places the datastore within that directory.

Once that is done, you can run `01_convert_to_datastore.py` and `02_register_and_deconolve.py` without any interactions. Depending on your computing hardware, you should expect 1-2 hours for `01_convert_to_datastore.py` and a couple days for `02_register_and_deconolve.py`. The second file is compute intensive, because it deconvolves 3 channel z-stacks at each tile over 9 hours, runs [U-FISH](https://github.com/UFISH-Team/U-FISH) for 2 MERFISH (or smFISH) channel at each tile, performs a rigid, affine, and optical flow field registration across imaging rounds, and globally registers the fidicual channel.

Once `02_register_and_deconolve.py` is finished, you will need to create the correct cellpose settings. We have found that initially peforming cellpose segmentation on a downsampled and maximum Z projected polyDT image is sufficient to seed Baysor for segmentation refinement.

Next, you'll run `03_pixeldecode_and_baysor.py` to first optimize the pixel-based decoding parameters on a subset of tiles, then perform pixel-based decoding for all tiles, and filter the data to limit false positives. This step should again take a few minutes, depending on your hard disk and GPU configuration.

## Ensuring a sucessful run

We have included the proper output of the `merfish3d-analysis` package for this dataset on the BIL servers in the `results` directory. You should be able to compare your obtained results to ours to ensure that there were no computation errors. One common issue we have run into is if the optical flow registration fails due to processor specific instructions (specifically older processors that lack AVX2). Please contact us if you have this issue, we have a workaround during installation that we can provide to you. 